# Basics

Variant caller files (VCFs) are used to store variant data (Single Nucleotide polymorphisms, indels, rearranagements, etc.) across a set of samples or individuals. The VCF file format was developed by the 1000 genomes analysis group in 2011[^1] and has quickly become a standard for storing working with variant data. More recently, the Global Alliance for Genomics & Health has implemented a file formats task team to act as custodian of the VCF/BCF file formats[^2], in addition to other sequencing related file formats.

[Bcftools](http://samtools.github.io/bcftools/ "Bcftools") is a powerful program for manipulating and working with VCFs. It is developed alongside samtools. It has a number of notable functions including:

* calling variants
* the ability to quickly query and access particular regions of the genome
* applying filters 
* format conversion 

It is important to realize that the variant caller format is a standard; A set of rules that define exactly how information will be specified within a file. This allows for interoperability between programs and ensures consistancy in the way the variant data and associated genotypes are specified.

##  Structure

Although the VCF File Format is a specification, it has changed slightly over time. Most people have only ever worked with VCF version 4.0, version 4.1, or version 4.2 (the most recent). Newer versions have allowed for additional types of variation (e.g. structural) or information associated with a genotype call to be represented within VCF files. Regardless, the basic structure has remained the same.

Below is a brief description of the structure, but the full specification is available [here](http://www.htslib.org/doc/bcftools-1.1.html).

### Meta-information lines (Header)

Every VCF Files begins with meta-information lines, or a header. These lines all begin with ‘##’ (two pound signs) and are used to describe basic attributes of the file, such as the version, or date generated. There are also lines used to specify what chromosomes or contigs are represented within the file, in addition to defining certain types of information that are represented within the file. 

### Fields

Following the meta-information lines, there is a single line (the header line) containing 8 mandatory fields used in the subsequent lines to specify variants and additional fields to specify the genotypes for a set of samples. The header line begins with a # sign.

The mandatory fields listed are:

1. __CHROM__ - The chromosome or Contig.
2. __POS__ - The position of the variant on the chromsome.
3. __ID__ - A name assigned the the identified variant. Frequently, in human genetics, this refers to the rs number (from dbSNP). 
4. __REF__ - The reference allele. Variants are called based on the positions where aligned sequences differ from a reference genome. This makes genotypes comparable among individuals. 
5. __ALT__ - The alternate allele. Multiple alternate alleles can exist, and are seperated by a comma.
6. __QUAL__ - A quality score assigned to each variant indicating the phred scaled quality that the alternative allele call is incorrect. 
7. __FILTER__ - Because errors do occur during variant calling, its possible to assign named filters to help in assessing the quality of a variant. For example, a variant with a low depth (few reads supporting it) may be assigned a low-depth filter and removed for certain types of analysis.
8. __INFO__ - Additional information such as the basis for a variant call or annotations.
9. __FORMAT (optional)__ - Genotype calls can have variable formats. The format allows the format to be specified for columns 10+. 
10. __Sample…__ - Columns 10+ contain sample information.

### Same Format, different types of Compression

Variant caller format (VCF) files can be compressed in various ways but the underlying data structure remains the same:

* __bcf__ - Binary format of a vcf file. Can be compressed or uncompressed. 
* __vcf.gz__ - BGZF Compressed.
* __vcf__ - Text format of variant caller format.

bcftools can work with all of these. Although the binary format ends in bcf, I will still refer to them as VCF files. 

## Obtaining VCF Files

[Thousand Genomes](http://www.1000genomes.org/data) provides ftp access to variant calls. VCF files arent as widely used in some model organisms, but because the format and bcftools are powerful tools for working with them, I have generated vcf files manually in the past. For example, [this gist](https://gist.github.com/danielecook/5cd0e6e41d3db819a22d) generates a VCF file from wormbase 245 variant calls.

## Installing BCFTools

bcftools can be installed on unix based systems. The easiest way, on a mac is to use [homebrew](homebrew.sh).

	brew install samtools

A [linux port of homebrew](https://github.com/Homebrew/linuxbrew) has also been developed, although bcftools is also available via apt-get.

# Using bcftools

All of the examples below use an [example dataset](http://www.danielecook.com/files/CB4853.bcf) (HIGHLIHGT ME!!!)

## Viewing Variant Data

__bcftools view__ can be used to output variants. A number of options are available.

## Indexes

As stated earlier, bcftools allows you to query particular regions of the genome. VCF files can be large so the ability to quickly retrieve subsets saves a lot of time. This also allows you to query remote vcf files without downloading them in their entirety. 

	bcftools view -r 1:10000-20000 ftp://ftp-trace.ncbi.nih.gov/1000genomes/ftp/release/20110521/ALL.chr1.phase1_release_v3.20101123.snps_indels_svs.genotypes.vcf.gz

The above command will ask for variants on chromosome 1 from basepair 10,000 to 20,000 from the 1000 genomes project and return the results. Bcftools downloads the index and uses it to retrieve only this part of the file (which in its entirety is over 10 gigabytes in size). 

Only VCF files that are compressed (ending in bcf or vcf.gz) can be indexed.  

	bcftools index <vcf file>

Newer versions of bcftools will create indices ending in __csi__, older versions use __tbi__ indices.  bcftools can recognize and use both kinds. The tbi format indices are in the[tabix](http://samtools.sourceforge.net/tabix.shtml) format.

## Generating Statistics

## Querying / Converting Variant Data

## Filtering Variant Data

## Using Unix Pipes

### Using Soft Filters

## Calling Bcftools from other languages

Integrating bcftools with other languages can be useful for extracting information for analysis.

### R

### Python

## Other Functions

__calling variants__

__concat__

__merge__




[^1]:	[http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/content/27/15/2156.short](http://bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/content/27/15/2156.short)

[^2]:	[http://ga4gh.org/#/fileformats-team](http://ga4gh.org/#/fileformats-team)