---
title: vcf
author: Daniel Cook
excerpt: |
  <p><strong>vcf</strong> is a tool for importing vcf files into STATA.</p>
  <h4>Installation</h4>
  <br />
  <pre class='prettyprint lang-bsh'>
  ssc install vcf
  </pre>
layout: post
permalink: /vcf/
dsq_thread_id:
  - 
keyword_cache:
  - 'a:1:{s:13:"keywords_time";i:1399046001;}'
rp4wp_cached:
  - 1
rp4wp_auto_linked:
  - 1
categories:
  - Programming
  - STATA Programs
tags:
  - 1000genomes
  - STATA
  - tool
  - vcf
---
The [Variant Caller Format][1] developed by the 1000 genomes project makes it easy to filter and manage large amounts of variant information for a set of subjects.

STATA offers an easy interface for sorting, filtering, and manipulating large datasets. I have developed a tool, **vcf** that makes it easy to import .vcf files into Stata (no easy task!).

The program does two challenging things to prepare the file for Stata:

  1. It Splits the INFO column (delimited by ; ) into seperate columns. This is necessary because STATA has a string limit of 244 characters and truncates this column otherwise.
  2. It recodes genotypic data, showing the genotypes of each individual.

#### Installation

<pre class='prettyprint lang-bsh'>ssc install vcf
</pre>

<!--more-->

#### Requirements

I have only tested with STATA 12/SE. I believe it will also work with STATA 11 and perhaps earlier.

#### Usage

<pre class='prettyprint lang-bsh'>vcf using "path/to/file.vcf"
</pre>

#### Limits

  1. While it is possible to read in very large files &#8211; this program cannot handle enormous VCF Files. I have successfully loaded in files that are a few gigabytes. Therefore ideally you&#8217;ll filter enormous VCF Files prior to using this.
  2. If your VCF Files has more than 9 alternative alleles, this program will incorrectly assign alleles beyond the 9th alternative allele.

<div class="alert alert-danger">
  <h4>
    Important!
  </h4>
  
  <p>
    This program is still under development. I need your feedback &#8211; comments / suggestions / ideas. It has been tested with VCF Format 4.1 but not 4.0 or earlier.
  </p>
</div>

 [1]: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3137218/